Esther Valentin 
IS 340 Spring 2026 
May 12, 2026 

#INTRODUCTION
The Chicago Public School System is one of the largest educational systems in the country. Ranking the third largest for eleven years but recently becoming the fourth largest in 2022, CPS serves as a critical steppingstone for over 300,000 students (Vevea & Peña, 2023). Considering Chicago’s rich history, it is necessary to consider the political, physical, and institutionalized disparities against students of color, who contemporarily dominate the makeup of the CPS student’s demographic. For example, in 1863 a city ordinance required Black and White students to attend separate schools, and it was not until over 100 years later that Chicago Public Schools finally did undertake a court-ordered desegregation plan in the early 1980s (Chicago Public Schools and Segregation a Historical View of How Education Decisions Have Perpetuated Segregation, n.d.). As an attempt to counter the historical implications for marginalized students of color, my approach to this project starts with the creation of a web application tool as an accessible, educational, and interactive outlet of information. Our website provides users with a user-friendly platform to explore information provided about schools, application timelines, and further statistics. Influential visualizations will be implemented across the site, with the additional feature of allowing users to personalize a visualization by selecting different schools and/or filters. After, users could select a school, and a visualization dashboard will provide further statistics on the selected school. In addition, a small survey will be available to users to directly receive feedback and implement improvements to the website. Users will gain a deeper understanding of 6th–12th grade education in Chicago and be better equipped to navigate their educational options. 

#MOTIVATION
The motivation for this project deeply stems from my personal experience and upbringing in Chicago. As a Chicago native who went through multiple types of Chicago Public School Systems including a charter school, academic center, and ultimately a selective enrollment high school, the trajectory of my college career heavily relied on the education and systemic structures I have navigated. Because of the diverse makeup of my education, I was able to experience and perceive the disparities in resource distribution and investments into schools, which correlates with Chicago’s history as a segregated city. My interest and passion for this project and previous analysis stems from my belief in education that began in elementary school, where I immediately knew as a young person, that I wanted to pursue higher education. But for first generation Latinos in my neighborhood, this objective was not quite emphasized or thought of as relevantly tangible. My personal experiences then led me to pursue further research into contemporary statistics.  

Previous exploratory data analysis I’ve conducted on a publicly available CPS dataset revealed startling statistics that projected the extreme difference in possible results, which further motivated me to establish this exploratory tool. The specific dataset I conducted an analysis on was provided by the City of Chicago data catalog, with the title of the dataset reading “Chicago Public Schools – School Progress Reports SY2425”: a report on the 2024 to 2025 academic school year (Chicago Public Schools - School Progress Reports SY2425 | City of Chicago | Data Portal, 2026).  

For example, the visualization below (created by myself on Visual Studio Code) represents the dropout rates of Chicago Public High Schools. Although the visualization could be improved, within the graph the highest dropout rate was 48.65%, whilst the lowest dropout rate was 0.25%. Interestingly enough, the types of schools by their category (military, charter, selective enrollment, etc.) created a notable difference in dropout rate, with the highest dropout rates being amongst certain charter school networks, and the lowest dropout rates among selective enrollment high schools, military schools, and other charter school networks.  
